The River To The
Sea will be free from coast to coast
anger is rising in US universities
against Israel's war on Gaza defy a
Crackdown students are demanding their
schools cut off links with Israel but
have these protests become politicized
and is freedom of speech under threat
this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle students in American
universities have for decades stood up
for what they believed in from fighting
for social justice and equal rights to
pushing back against Global Wars they've
made their voices heard and now they're
speaking out against Israel's war on
Gaza which has killed more than 34,000
people in the past 6 months the protest
which began in New York's Columbia
University intensified last week the
police Crackdown that followed caused
the anger to spread to other
universities in the US and even to
Europe and Australia the students say
their right to protest is being crushed
and these demonstrations may have an
even bigger impact since it's an
election year in the United States we'll
get the thoughts of our guests in just a
moment first Patty khh BRS our coverage
from one pro test at George Washington
University this encampment is unique
because here at George Washington
University it didn't exist until
Thursday morning the students said that
they were encouraged to do this because
of what happened at Colombia and this is
also unique in that this isn't just
George Washington this is students from
eight different schools universities all
around the Washington area one of their
main demands is divestment these are
some of the wealthiest schools with the
largest endowments in the country they
want to see uh more transparency in
exactly what they invest in and also
they want to see them divest from any
company that does business with Israel
and again that's just one of many
demands and you'll notice that they've
been handing out masks to the students
that's because many of them the prop
Palestinian protesters say they've been
docks they've had their pictures put on
trucks and driven around campus and
their information put online so a lot of
masks because there is concern about
repercussions that said they say not
going to go anywhere until their demands
are met Patty Caine Washington DC for
inside
story so let's take a closer look at why
University campuses have become a focal
point for growing opposition to the war
on Gaza students at Columbia University
in New York set up a Gaza solidarity
encampment on April 17th they pitched
their tents on campus a day after
Colombia president Minish safik faced a
congressional hearing on allegations of
anti-Semitism at the University she then
called called in police to disperse the
protesters more than 100 students were
arrested in the Crackdown but another
Camp sprang up protests have since
erupted on at least 30 campuses around
the US escalating tensions and sparking
debates about freedom of speech the
students are demanding their
universities cut Financial ties with
companies and weapons manufacturers
profiting from Israel's
war well let's bring in our guests now
and they're all joining us from the
United States in New York we have Jude
Taha Palestinian journalist and student
at the Columbia University graduate
school of Journalism in Austin Texas
we'll be hearing from Jeremy Suri
historian and Professor for Global
Leadership history and public policy at
the University of Texas at Austin and in
Washington political strategist and
former senior Congressional Aid Reena
sha thank you very much all of you for
being with us Jude let's start with you
if you can give us an idea of the
current situation there at Colombia
University on this Friday morning as we
record the show because this is where it
all began and where deadlines to clear
that camp keep being
extended um thank you so much for having
me absolutely uh Colombia is where the
original encampment took place I was
there for the pitching of the original
tents on the south lawn before they
decided to move to the opposite lawn
after arrest um the situation inside the
campus is quite different from the
situation outside the campus um what
we're seeing right now is students are
settling into the encampment there are
groups of people forming there's a lot
of community being grown inside um a lot
of teachings a lot of um activities that
show solidarity with re with Palestine
um protests and chants can be heard
obviously um outside the camp is and
outside the campus is quite a different
story um protests for Palestine have
been prevalent since day one of the
encampment yesterday we saw a huge
pro-israeli protest that was
organized um by two extremists from what
I've seen on social media um pro-israeli
protesters were surrounding campus NYPD
was present um and chants were heard for
in support of Israel with bring the
hostages home meanwhile inside um C some
Pro Palestinian students were facing the
gate and they were getting called uh
names we heard a few slurs while I was
reporting out there tensions are high
outside the campus but inside the
encampment solidarity is on an extreme
High there is a level of Peace inside
the encampment students are familiar
with each other they are comfortable you
know it's not easy being outside the
weather in New York has been Shifty um
but students have been dedicated in
their demands they are asking that
everyone
Center um especially when they are
talking about the reasoning of the
encampment and especially under
suppression um they're pretty United in
stating that although freedom of dude do
they are they concerned that they that
the camp is going to get
cleared there are um concerns certainly
negotiations are happening as far as we
know last night we received an email
that negotiations are happening and that
an NYPD sweep is not in sight for
yesterday every day is a new day
negotiations are being updated quite
frequently um the camp is having a
general assembly nearly every night to
announce to students who are in the
encampment about updates as far as we
know we have not heard anything as for
today okay Jeremy let's get uh the idea
the situation at the University of Texas
where you are how is the University
responding to protests
there so uh the University brought in
police to the campus uh particularly
State Police as well as City police and
University Police uh on Wednesday and
this made the situation worse I would
say that on our campus there are a lot
of students who are very concerned about
what's happening in the Middle East um a
majority are probably um more concerned
about the treatment of civilians in Gaza
and elsewhere but there's a very large
contingent that's also concerned about
Israel's security and the Israeli
hostages who are still being held by
Hamas M so the campus has a lot of
concern that's being voiced but it has
been peaceful there are no encampments
there was a demonstration on Wednesday
and the police were brought into campus
and as I've written about the arrival of
the police made things worse it provoked
students uh it provoked um violence uh
low-scale violence between the police
and the students most of the violence
came from the police yesterday was much
more calm there were larger
demonstrations but they were peaceful
and there was very little police
presence on campus so so far we've had
expressions of concern from students a
relatively divided campus but a campus
that is not at war with itself and we've
had a very little violence okay uh Reena
we'll get more onto the Crackdown in
just a moment first of all I just want
to get your ideas your feelings about
this student protest that really has
spread across so many University
campuses are you surprised to see the
speed and and the intensity with which
it's taken
hold this is democracy and and I
actually think it's a very beautiful
thing because as a longtime political uh
Insider operative I can tell you this
year being a presidential election year
so much on the line here in these United
States uh one thing that is seemingly
widespread has been voter apathy so far
because we have the same two choices we
had in 2020 the American voter in
general loves something new every few
years and we don't have that this time
around so what we're seeing again is uh
is a lot of worry amongst those of Us in
the political class that really want to
see political participation we're
wondering what turnout's going to be
like how the electorate feels and so
when I see a movement like this of
students taking uh peaceful nonviolent
actions expressing their concern about
the US government's backing of Israel of
where are taxpayer dollars going I think
it's extremely healthy and that's not a
partisan statement to make it's just
saying that this is what's enshrined our
constitution the ability to assemble
peacefully the ability to use your voice
um democracy in the streets is an
incredible incredible thing and so I am
supportive of these students doing so
non-violently and peacefully again
because this expression again speaks to
what is going to be so important on the
ballot in November okay then what do you
make of the I just jump in there because
what do you make of the response then to
these protests that have by and large as
you say been
peaceful well I can speak to the
Congressional response from Republican
in the house chamber uh when they went
to Columbia University's campus I was
taken AB back number one I just want our
audience to know that that is such an
unusual move we've not seen that in the
modern era as somebody who has served
two former Republican members of the
house uh if I were still there advising
I would have absolutely advised against
it and said it was a bad move on top of
it the words of the speaker and the
other members of the house that they
were delivering on a private campus
calling for the resignation of the
president speaking to students in a way
that painted all of them with a broad
brush uh speaking to speaking down to
them I mean the students no matter where
you look from coast to coast they are
the future of this country these people
are elected to serve us they are our
representatives and for them to take
that tone that all of these students
assembled were part of hate-filled
speech I get it there are Bad actors in
every movement and we should condemn
them but not all students assembled in
these tent encampments are out there
wanting to assault their fellow Jewish
students they are all out there
concerned again about America's role and
backing BB Netanyahu while on the one
hand we are supplying weapons and funds
to to do what he wants to do in Gaza
without listening to Biden and on the
other hand we're sending billions in
humanitarian Aid to Gaza this is a
hypocrisy these students are concerned
about and for Congressional leaders to
continue giving unfettered support to
Israel simply on the basis of all of
their religion I think is a horrible
move and that's not rec izing the
separation of church and state I get it
I just want to jump in there because
Jude was obviously at Columbia
University where uh the Republican uh
house Speaker Mike Johnson visited on
Wednesday this is what Reena was just
talking about what were the students
feelings
towards uh Republican Johnson's visit
there um to be quite honest there wasn't
much of a reaction from the encampment
at far as I was there um a lot of the
students students are very very focused
on their demands they're very focused on
upholding Community guidelines and
they're very focused about they believe
that what they're doing is right you
know they believe that their voices
should be heard they come from a legacy
of student
protesters um and they are less
concerned with freedom of speech of what
the person said they're just kind of
concerned more so about what's happening
in R their complicity in it I think they
expected this response um however it did
not really phase much um the
conversations in the en in the
encampment were very much so still
focused on r on divestment on building
Community um and how to further their
solidarity with Palestine um that's been
the focus as far as I've been there okay
Jeremy another example of politicians
getting involved there are quite a few
that we'll get to but this one is
particularly Texas uh Governor Greg
Albert calling these demonstrations
anti-Semitic
are
they no um there are certain
anti-semitic elements and voices that
have been heard there has been some
vandalism of the uh Hillel Center at UT
uh with um anti-semitic graffiti and
things of that sort so there have been
instances of anti-Semitism but certainly
on Wednesday when the police were called
in uh that demonstration happened to be
behind my office and my office is right
near where that occurred and I I was
outside for about 4 5 minutes to an hour
during the demonstration and when the
police went into the demonstration and I
did not hear a single anti-semitic chant
I did not see a single anti-semitic sign
uh these were students uh arguing for
free Palestine and then there were
Jewish students there arguing for
freeing the hostages um and in that case
uh the video that you're showing now uh
that was a reaction to a demonstration
that was free speech and that was not
anti-Semitism and dude what about you
there on Colombia what evidence have you
seen if any of anti semitism there have
been a couple of instances that have
spread quite widely on media for example
of a sign being held up uh pointing
towards pro-israel students saying this
these are hamas's next targets I mean
instances like that really don't help
the cause do
they um what I've seen in the encampment
there is a very large um Jewish presence
um Jewish voices for peace have been
essential for the Gaza solidarity
encampment in Colombia um what I've also
seen is there was a press conference
held by Jewish students who were
suspended or arrested outside the
president's house where they verbalized
that they do not feel comfortable with
their Jewish voices being used um in
Zionist spaces or used to as an excuse
for what's happening in re um I do know
that certain instances have gone viral I
would like to emphasize that the
instances have so far been outside of
the encampment and there are a lot of
there was a lot of presence of
especially in the early days um of pro
Palestine um protesters that were
entering in and out of Campus you know
campus is on lockdown and access is
restricted but that does not mean that
necessarily everyone that is coming in
and out as a student I will also say
that certain chants that have been going
viral have all taken place outside the
campus um inside the campus the
solidarity is extremely high between um
anti-zionist Jewish students and prop
Palestinian students and the encampment
is set up to be accessible to all and
it's very Equitable in the even the
services that are being provided there
there is a food table that has food
nearly for everyone there's kosher food
there's halal food so I do want to say
that although these instances have
happened inside the encampment um
especially Jewish voices inside the
encampment are insisting that the focus
should not be on their um feelings it
should go back to um and outside the
encampment yesterday's protest um was
quite surprising because a few of the
demonstrators um were saying remarks
that don't necessarily align with the
broader idea of what Pro Israeli
protesters are saying I think in
movements such as this one there is a
lot of people present that not don't
necessarily all share the same values
however in the gods of solidarity
encampment the instances of anti- ISM I
have not been able to see or pinpoint
and I had been I have been there nearly
every day okay um for most of my day
reporting Reena when you when you hear
Jude's account of the situation and
Jeremy's account of the situation down
there in Texas it doesn't seem like
there's much of a problem with these
protests and yet we've got politicians
making more of it than perhaps is
necessary why are the presidents of
these universities being hauled in front
of congressional committee hearings to
EXP laain their stance on
anti-Semitism well unfortunately we
exist in an era where pure political
theater seems to win cheap political
points for for people who sit at the
highest purches of our land in
leadership and there's no other
explanation but that you know look on
the Republican side even this past fall
if you paid attention to the Republican
primary debates in which um former
governor of South Carolina and former un
Ambassador uh Nikki Haley was successful
in many ways she talked about
Israel being America's only Ally in the
region and I've talked to a number of
Democrats over the years as well
especially this past week and they say
that they don't think Biden is taking a
different approach than any American
president would and I think that's
what's at the core of them here these
students and even regular everyday
Americans like me feel very very
strongly that the approach we've taken
to dealing with Benyamin Netanyahu is
wrong uh the Biden blink and Duo
has had a drip drop approach to the
geopolitical tension we're seeing in
Ukraine uh we're seeing again in Gaza I
don't feel that there's much leadership
at the wheel and again this is across
the board so what we're seeing right
that frustration coming to the four and
what I think is most important though is
to remember what former president Trump
said he would do he said he would broker
piece in the Middle East through his
son-in-law he did not we are so far away
from aate solution it is laughable but
is the final point just in the past few
weeks we heard leaked audio as well as I
think on the record statements I could
be wrong about that from president
former president Trump excuse me who
again is a candidate right now for the
White House saying that Benyamin
Netanyahu should call this off this is
not good he needs to bring this to an
end right okay Jeremy I can see you're
wanting to jump in
there well I think this is actually
about something larger than the Middle
East for the last two to three years um
many politicians have been attacking
universities and the same politicians
who today are saying that universities
like Columbia and the University of
Texas should crack down on anti-semitic
speech as they see it are the same
politicians who two or three years ago
said we didn't have enough free speech
that there weren't enough voices for
conservatives on our campus what I think
we're witnessing is that politicians
particularly in the Republican party but
not exclusively but largely in the
Republican Party are fearful of a Young
Generation that is more diverse that has
different viewpoints and a young Young
Generation that is quite frankly opposed
to most of what the Republican party is
about if we're talking about abortion
rights if we're talking about religious
freedom if we're talking about various
things US policy toward different parts
of the world many of these protesters
are also against what the Democratic
party is for but they are seen as more
threatening to the Republican party and
so for the last 3 to four years the
Republican party has been using
universities as a Whipping Boy as a
place for which they can Flex their
muscles and show that they are
conservative and show that they're tough
and blame students for problems that are
not made by students and so I think
that's why this is on that point how do
you think the college administrators are
standing up to that well I think the
college administrators are doing a very
poor job of standing up to that and the
reason they're doing a poor job is first
of all they're hoping for Goodwill from
politicians many of these politicians
who are attacking universities are the
products of these universities Alise
stonic uh who graduated from Harvard
University was the person who attacked
the president of Harvard University so
first of all administrators have to
recognize that politicians are now more
hostile than they were and most
administrators are trying not to be
vocal and if they're not vocal if
they're staying out of the debate what's
happening is they're letting the
politicians dominate the debate we need
to hear University administrators stand
up more vocally for free speech stand up
for the rights and interests of students
not taking political sides but defending
what an academic environment is about do
do you agree with that I mean how did
you rate uh president Manu shafi's
testimony at her Congressional hearing
appearance uh did did she give students
did students hear what they wanted to
hear that she was defending them that
she was defending the right to free
speech um I don't believe that that is
what they heard especially at Columbia
University where there is an
anti-Semitism task force that was
created in response to the protesters
and anti-Semitism was not defined um we
don't know what anti-Semitism is in
regards to the task force it's kind of
like I I'll know it when I see it um I
think at Columbia University what's
super interesting as well is we're
seeing faculty stand up for academic
freedom and freedom of speech um faculty
had a huge display on low Library steps
where essentially what they were saying
is although we might not all agree
politically a majority of us agree that
students deserve the space to vocalize
and protest what they believe is right
to have an environment where they can
voice out their opinions they can say
what they believe in and not be under
threat of suspension not be under threat
of eviction not be under threat of
losing their academic degrees um and I
do think that largely on Colombia's
campus many faculty members are quite
upset at the reaction especially
bringing the NYPD in to arrest
protesters who were largely peaceful I
think that display really shook Colombia
as a society as a community to its core
because it's a scene that they are not
used to seeing especially when the
protest has been as targeted as they
were by Administration as Pro
Palestinian students have been dealing
with disciplinary action since the first
um protest happened on campus and I do
think that there is no more space for
these students to vocalize and verbalize
what they want to say this is why the
encampment is such a special space for
them essentially what is happening is
when students walk into the they feel
like they're living in a reality that is
shared where they can share what they're
seeing they can be upset about it and
still feel supported and around
Community the teachings have been essal
for them so we I can see you're wanting
to jump in there go ahead yeah you know
I think that what the students have
highlighted with these movements which I
believe we'll see more of over the
weekend and into next week is the the so
much gray that's here and and look I've
been a political operative for a very
long time and Tra had the great
privilege of traveling the United States
speaking to rural and urban Americans
and this is what rural Americans also
want they don't want billions of our
taxpayer dollars going overseas to kill
other people uh to to have other leaders
decide indiscriminately to do what they
want to do you know a lot of our
politics today is sensationalized but
one thing that's not is these dispatches
out of the Middle East out of um Ukraine
that show us the devastation that
certain leaders are bringing to certain
parts of the world and that is a shock
not only to to the Consciousness because
we are getting it steadily um we're
getting in a way we've never had before
we are more technologically connected to
The Ballot Box than ever before and in
the same way the that's coming is
incessant and that is what has shown
American people and students this is
what Republicans should want they should
want critical thinking they should want
students to express themselves
peacefully and really dissect these
issues there's a lot of gray here look
I'm not Jewish I'm not Muslim but I can
empathize with the pl of both you can be
an American I've heard this from rural
and urban Americans you can be somebody
that says I want the hostages of October
7th returned and I want the killing
whatever BB is doing in Gaza to stop
there for there to be a Perman fire
there is a lot of great here that
unfortunately doesn't get talked about
enough and this movement is highlighting
sure Jeremy there's a couple of weeks
left of term do you see these protests
continuing into the summer even
returning in the Autumn when the
election happens in
November well I think we will see more
protests for the next week or two of the
term but I do think there'll be some
over the summer but it will become more
sparse uh and that might be a good thing
there might be a cooling off period uh
and what happens in the fall will be
very much influenced by the events of
the summer uh do events in the Middle
East uh continue to expand as the
violence continue to expand there how
does US policy change uh how is the US
government's role seen by students so
there are a lot of variables what I do
want to say though is although I agree
with uh the points being made about how
this there there's a lot of there should
be a lot of agreement from rural voters
with uh many of the things that were
just said I will say that attacking
demonstrators at universities always
works with rural voters because rural
voters see University students as
privileged and even though they might
not like spending money in the Middle
East they see what what students are
doing or the way it's depicted they see
it as unpatriotic and this is why in the
1960s in the 1970s and today certain
conservative politicians will often
attack universities and attack the
privileged students at universities
unfortunately this is politically
effective so Republicans will continue
to do this I would expect to see more of
it okay Jude the last word to you how
would you like uh the university to
respond going forward to these
protests I think the response should be
a genuine conversation and consideration
with the demands the protest are making
I think a lot of students in the
encampment demanding divestment
demanding Financial transparency de
demanding amnesty as a result of the
Crackdown needs to be heard and I think
a lot of the focus should be on the fact
that they want actionable steps they no
longer want to be complicit they want
their voices to be heard and I think I
want to make a point to say that
although students do go to these
prestigious universities a lot of them
are risking quite a lot to make the
statement hurt and to them it feels
worth it um one statement that has been
told to me last night was we're sitting
in a university in camps but we are
optionally choosing to be here because
there are no more universities standing
in they are saying that although the
Crackdown has been brutal the focus
should be on the fact that they are safe
there and that students in Le and other
people in Le are not safe and I think
there needs to be a real Reckoning with
the reasoning these protests are
happening and the reasoning people the
men
investment Jude we do have to leave it
there many thanks to all of you great to
hear your voices on this topic Jude Taha
Jeremy Sur and Reena
sha and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's
aljazeera.com for further discussion do
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story from me
Laura Kyle and the whole team here bye
for
now make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer